---
title: Initial Impressions of C for Programmers (Deitel)
tags: review C book
---

For Cyber Monday I purchased *C for Programmers with an Introduction to
C11*, by Paul and Harvey Deitel. My overall impressions of this book so far
are rather lukewarm, but writing a book “for programmers” is difficult
because it’s hard to define what a “programmer” is. I think K&R C would’ve
been closer to what I wanted, but it’s an old—though most likely still quite
relevant—book by now.

<!--more-->

The initial chapters that I’ve skimmed through have focused on how to run
and compile C programs, what a terminal is, what Linux is, what an
assignment operator does…all things that I think a programmer should know,
and nothing that is really about C itself. Perhaps for someone used to
Visual Studio their entire career, or a college student still relatively new
to programming, such topics would be useful. But for me, lost between all
that noise were the important subjects, such as how C compiles and links
code separately. As a “programmer”, what I don’t want is a tedious three
page example of *running* a guess-the-number game. __A book marketed as “for
programmers” should focus on where C differs from common procedural
languages__; what I want is *C for Python and Java Programmers*. Such a book
would focus on pointers, memory management, headers, security
considerations, bit manipulation, and other areas that C and its ilk are
known for, instead of devoting pages to operator precedence (which I’m never
going to use because if it’s not clear, I would add parentheses).

This probably isn’t an entirely fair assessment. As a Linux user, I’m
already fairly comfortable with the command line and a lot of the other
background material (like what Linux *is*) that perhaps most programmers
would like to learn about. But I also think most of the tedious preparatory
material—setting up compilers, running programs, and so on—should be farmed
out to other books or the Internet. A programming language book should focus
on the language. This would work better for languages like Python with a
single “standard” runtime, where there is a clear central location where a
user can find help and documentation on setting up a development
environment.

The book has it’s strong suits: the end of each chapter discusses secure
programming and specific problems to avoid in C. I would appreciate more of
this material, but at least it’s there.

Ultimately, this book’s problem is that it’s audience—“for programmers”—is
ill-defined. Different programmers are going to be comfortable with
different things and will need to review different subjects. But I feel the
first third of the book could have been far more concise.

__Out of five stars, this book would get three-and-a-half__. My advice? Skim
the first third of the book and focus on the topics that make C
different. This book could easily have been much more concise or focused
much more on topics and techniques unique to C, perhaps merging aspects of
an introductory C book and an intermediate *Effective C++* style book—that’s
what I would ideally want. It’ll get the job done (and I’ll post a
full review in a few months’ time), but it could be better.
