---
title: A Look Back on the First Semester
tags: Cornell
---

For someone who already has several years experience with programming,
through open-source, side-projects, and commercial work, what can they gain
from a university computer science course?

<!--more-->

Initially I doubted Cornell’s
[CS2112 course](http://www.cs.cornell.edu/Courses/cs2112/2014fa/), taught by
Andrew Myers. The curriculum sounded like a standard Java class, going
through various aspects of the language before touching upon data
structures, GUI toolkits, and HTTP servers. And superficially, that was the
course. Where CS2112 succeeded was in taking those concepts and challenging
us with them—sure, we might think we know how a hashtable works, but can we
actually implement one? We might’ve used Git for our side projects before,
but can we actually work in pairs to write software?

And Myers emphasized software *engineering* as well, requiring us to design
and specify our software before starting on the work. Because our last four
assignments were cumulative, those who glossed over design initially were
given a quite intimate lesson on what technical debt actually entails.

Overall, the class wasn’t about specific knowledge—it wasn’t about graphs,
or data structures, or generics—it was about how to design, write, and test
software. How to be a capital-S Software Developer, and how to reason about
complex design and implementation problems in the context of a larger
project, instead of in isolation as a cute “programming challenge” like so
many of us focus on today. Sure, this isn’t the flashy algorithmic wizardry,
obsessive performance optimization, or mystic code golfing that so many of
us associate with skill in our code jams and competitions. It’s stolid,
maybe even a little boring—but it’s what makes programming a craft, in
addition to an art and (someday) a science.

For any future Cornell students debating between 2110 and 2112, I highly
recommend the challenge of 2112. Just don’t procrastinate.
